# Appendix B: English Generation for Daydreaming

<!-- page: 371 -->
This appendix describes the English generator employed in DAYDREAMER
detail.

## B.1 The in

Generator

Whenever a concept is asserted into a context, and in certain other situations,
it is eligible for conversion into English by the generator. The generator takes

the following arguments:

(a) con:

current belief path, (c) switches:

the concept to be generated, (b) bp: the

various specifications such as the tense, case,

and so on, of the phrase to be generated, and (d) context: the context in which
to generate the concept.

### B.1.1 The Form of Generational Knowledge
Associated with each type of concept are generational templates which specify
how to produce an English phrase for that concept in different situations. Generational templates consist of: (a) an optional subject concept, (b) an optional

verb, (c) literal text, and (d) other concepts. Subjects are generated according
to a special procedure for subject generation which in turn recursively invokes
the generator. Verbs are generated by a procedure which contains fairly extensive morphological knowledge. Literal text is produced as English output
exactly as it appears in the template. Other concepts are generated through
recursive invocation of the generator. Modifications to the switches may be
specified following a concept: this enables specification of a different tense or
case.

<!-- page: 372 -->
Here is a sample generational template:

actor(con) want obj(con)+INF
This template specifies to: (a) invoke the special subject generation procedure
on the actor slot of the concept, (b) generate an appropriate form of the verb
want, (c) recursively invoke the generator on the value of the obj slot of the

concept, and employ an INF (infinitive) in generating that concept. Given the
concept
(WANT

actor

John

obj (PTRANS

actor John
to Movies))

the template might produce:

John would have wanted to go to the movies.

The template for obj(con) might have been:

actor(con) go to to(con)
Notice, however, that the subject in this template was not generated.
the generator did not produce:

That is,

John would have wanted John to go to the movies.
This is because the special procedure for subject generation does not generate
a subject if it is the same as the subject of the phrase in which it is embedded.
If there is no generational template associated with the type of a concept to
be generated, the parent of this type is consulted, the parent of the parent of
this type is consulted, and so on, until a template is found.

### B.1.2 Subject Generation
The method for generating a subject s’ of a phrase S’ embedded in a phrase S

is as follows: If s’ is the same as the subject s of S and +INF (infinitive) or
+GER (gerund) have been specified for s’, do not generate s’ at all. Otherwise,
if +INF or +GER have been specified, s’ is generated in the possessive or objective case, depending on whether +POSS-SUBJ (possessive subject) has been
specified. Otherwise, if +REFL (reflexive) has been specified, s’ is generated in
the reflexive case. Otherwise, s’ is generated in the nominative case.

## B.2 Generational Templates

This section presents the generational templates for conversion of concepts into
English in DAYDREAMER.

<!-- page: 373 -->
B.2._

GENERATIONAL

### B.2.1 Mental TEMPLATES

353

Transfer

Actions of type MTRANS are generated different ways, depending on the values of the various slots. A variety of phrases are employed when one person
MTRANSes to another that the former person has or does not have a goal to
be in a positive relationship (such as LOVERS and EMPLOYMENT) with the
latter person.
Such an MTRANS is generated according to the following template:

?Person1 verb ?Person2 [text
and according to the following table:

Other MTRANSes are generated as follows: If obj(con) is an INTRODUCTION, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) introduce actor(con)+REFL to to(con)
Otherwise, if obj(con) is a MOVIE, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) watch obj(con) [at from(con)]
Otherwise, if the actor and from of con are the same, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) tell to(con) obj(con)
Otherwise, if actor(con) and to(con) are the same and from(con) is not a PERSON, MTRANS

is generated as:

actor(con) read obj(con) in from(con)
(If obj(con) is a TELNO, look up is used instead of read.)

### B.2.2 Other Actions

and States

A number of actions and states concepts are generated according to the following
template:

actors(con) verb tect [slot(con)]

<!-- page: 374 -->
These concepts are specified by the following tables:

type
[vert
FACQUAINTED
[be |acquainted |__|
Ara Pog Woocet|ipa] watarear we Bh eMprob
ATTRACTIVE [be [ate
sd
COLLEGE || go|schoolat_____|
to
obj_
PEXECUTIVE
[be | powerful executive |__|
HURT
[be [injured
|
ENSuRED=
Be |exe ae
M-BEAT-UP
M-BREAK-UP
M-DATE

go

M-KISS
al
I
M-LOGIN
[log [into
————SSS—S«d
CS
[M-MOVIE
|| go _| see a movie
[/M-PHONE || call__|
|
[M-PUTON
|| put | on
M-STUDY
M-WORK

POSS
[have[ —SS—Cidr id
PTRANS
"Te cae
TC
[PTRANSI
[|go_|to
‘it. _|
RICH yaad self BONE Cen eee
cae
(bea ibe ee
ee
RAELLSaa ao¥'egs [peel eee
es
[STAR
| be | amovestr [|_|
UNDER-DOORWAY ||be__|underadoorway |__|
[WELL-DRESSED
|| be_| dressed tokil |_|
An M-PURCHASE

is generated as:

actors(con) buy obj(con) from from(con)
Several concepts are generated according to the following template:

head(bp) verb text1 others [text2] [slot(con)|
where others is actors(con) without head(bp) (or anyone [negative verb] or someone [positive verb] if others would be empty).

the following table:!
14+PROGR refers to progressive.

These concepts are specified by

<!-- page: 375 -->
have
go+PROGR |outwith |_|
“fade fon Tac
the ice with
An exception is that if the concept is a VPROX

Jo

|

and any element of ac-

tors(con) is not a PERSON and head(bp) is an element of actors(con), then the
VPROx

is generated as:

head(bp) be near others
where others is actors(con) without head(bp).
An ATRANS

is generated as:

actors(con) pay to(con)
if obj(con) is CASH, otherwise it is generated as:

actors(con) give obj(con) to to(con)
An EARTHQUAKE

is generated as:

obj(con) has an earthquake
An EARTHQUAKE-ONSET

is generated as:

an earthquake start in obj(con)
A KNOW is generated as follows: If actor(con) is not
generated as:

a PERSON, then it is

obj(con) be in actor(con)
otherwise, it is generated as:

actor(con) know [that] obj(con)
where that is not generated if obj(con) is a OBJECT,

LOCATION,TIME-OF-

DAY, VPROX, or TELNO.
Several states are generated using the template:

slot(con)+POSS tezt
according to the following table:

concept

| tect

PTELNO
[telephone
number |actor
MOVIES
| movies
CLOTHES |
cS.

io”J

24POSS refers to possessive.

<!-- page: 376 -->
A daydreaming goal objective is generated according to the following template:

head(bp) verb [text] [slot(con)]
and the following table:

dd goal

|
obj+ GER
|
about something else
|
ad
0g
i
[get
evenwith
__|[reverse__|
—==—S~*dt CER
|
|
|rehearse |___———~—S~*diC
BFGER
|

RATIONALIZATION

ROVING

|REVENGE

REVERSAL
REHEARSAL

REPERCUSSIONS
—]consider —

Some personal goal objectives are generated as:

head(bp) verb text
according to the following table:

Type verb_| teat
ENTERTAINMENT ||be |entertained|
MONEY
[have [enough money_
A POSSESSIONS

is generated as:

head(bp) keep head(bp)+POSS belongings

### B.2.3 Goals A SUCCEEDED-GOAL

is generated as:

head(bp) succeed at obj(con)+GER
A FAILED-GOAL is generated differently, depending on obj(con), the objective of the goal. If the objective is an existing LOVERS relationship, the failed
goal is generated as:

head(bp) lose (actors(obj(con)) - head(bp))
Otherwise, if the objective is an existing EMPLOYMENT,
generated as:

head(bp) lose head(bp)+POSS job
Otherwise, it is generated as:

head(bp) fail at obj(con)+GER

the failed goal is

<!-- page: 377 -->
An ACTIVE-GOAL is generated as follows: If obj(con) is an EMPLOYMENT
and head(bp) is an ACTOR, then it is generated as:

head(bp) need work
Otherwise, if obj(con) is EMPLOYMENT,

it is generated as:

head(bp) verb a job [with other]
where (a) verb is want if it is a top-level goal and need if it is a subgoal, and

(b) other is actors(obj(con)) without head(bp), if any. Otherwise, if the concept
is a top-level goal, it is generated as:

head(bp) want obj(con)+INF
Otherwise, if the concept is a subgoal, it is generated as:

obj(con)+HAVETO
In each case above, would like is substituted for want if the concept is embedded
within an MTRANS. Thus, depending on whether a goal is a subgoal, a top-level
goal, or embedded within an MTRANS, respectively, it is generated as:

| have to go to the store.
| want to go to the store.
| would like to go to the store.

### B.2.4 Emotions
In DAYDREAMER, the generation of an emotion depends on: (a) whether it
is a positive, negative, or surprise emotion, (b) whether it is directed toward
someone, (c) whether it resulted from an alternative past scenario, and (d) the
goals to which it is connected.
With the exception of SURPRISE emotions, which are simply generated as
What do you know!, emotions are generated according to the following template:

head(bp) feel [strength(con)] emotion [to(con)] [reason]
For example, in
| feel interested in being entertained.

the head of the belief path (Me in this case) is generated as |, the verb is
generated as feel, no strength is generated, the emotion is generated as interested,
no to is generated, and the reason is generated as in being entertained.
A strength less than .3 is generated as a bit and a strength greater than .7 is
generated as really; otherwise, no strength is generated. The emotzon and reason,
and whether to generate the to, depend on the particular emotion, as specified
in the following table. The conditions are given on the left side of the table
and the corresponding generational components on the right side. The table is
scanned starting from the top. Once a line is encountered whose conditions are
satisfied, the emotion is generated according to the specified components.

<!-- page: 378 -->
io?
ddg concern
social esteem
social esteem

The conditions are:

(a) the to of the emotion specifying a person, if any,

toward whom the emotion is directed, (b) the altern?

of the emotion which

specifies whether the emotion resulted from an alternative past scenario, (c) the

active top-level goal (or concern), if any, associated with the emotion, and (d)
the failed or succeeded goal, if any, associated with the emotion. An additional
condition for the application of a given line in the table is the presence of an
emotion entry corresponding to the type of the emotion to be generated.
The notation “ddg concern” means that the concern of the goal is a daydreaming goal. Thus, | feel worried about losing my possessions is generated
when an emotion results from an imagined future failure of the POSSESSIONS
goal generated within a REPERCUSSIONS daydreaming goal concern (which
in turn motivates another REVERSAL goal to prevent that failure).
The notation “existing LOVERS” refers to a relationship that was already
true when the goal was first activated. Thus when Harrison Ford turns down
DAYDREAMER, | feel rejected is generated, while when DAYDREAMER is
dumped by Guy, | feel broken hearted is generated.
If the to? is marked “yes,” the to slot of the emotion is generated. If a reason
specifies a word and a goal, then a reason is generated as follows: If the goal is
a SUCCEEDED-GOAL or ACTIVE-GOAL, then the following is generated as
the reason:

word obj(goal)+GER
Otherwise, the following is generated as a reason.
word goal+GER
For example:

| feel interested in being entertained.
| feel displeased about failing at being entertained.

(However, a positive emotion corresponding
MENT goal is generated as | feel amused.)

to success of an ENTERTAIN-

<!-- page: 379 -->
## B.2 GENERATIONAL
### B.2.5 Attitudes A POS-ATTITUDE

TEMPLATES

359

is generated as:

head(bp) like obj(con)
If obj(con) is a PERSON, a NEG-ATTITUDE is generated as:
head(bp) think+NEG?=negate(NEG?)

much of obj(con)

(If the concept is negative, a positive verb is generated, otherwise a negative
verb is generated.) Otherwise, a NEG-ATTITUDE is generated as:

head(bp) dislike obj(con)
A ROMANTIC-INTEREST

is generated as:

head(bp) be interested in obj(con)
### B.2.6 Beliefs
A BELIEVE is generated as follows: If obj(con) is a MENTAL-STATE
a KNOW or BELIEVE, it is generated as:

and not

obj(con)+BP=cons(actor(con),BP)
(That is, the new belief path consists of actor(con) added to the head of the old
belief path.) Otherwise, it is generated as:

actor(con) verb obj(con)+SIMPLIFY-TENSE+BP=tail(BP)
The verb is think when obj(con) is ATTRACTIVE, otherwise it is believe.

### B.2.7 Objects and Locations
Concepts of the following types are generated by through use of a literal string
specified in the name slot of the concept: OBJECT, LOCATION, and CITY. If
there is no name slot, the concept is generated as some company, some city, and

so on.
MOVIE is generated as a movie; FASHIONABLE-CLOTHES
my cute outfit; TIME-OF-DAY is generated as the time.
ALUMNI-DIR

is generated as

is generated as:

the obj(obj(con)) Alumni Directory
Concepts which are variables are generated by retrieving an exemplar object
associated with the type of the variable, and then generating that object.

<!-- page: 380 -->
Persons

A global variable called *REFERENCES* enables generation of pronouns. Any
concept, once generated, of type OBJECT, but not an exemplar, and not Me,
and not already contained in *REFERENCES* is added to *REFERENCES* after
first deleting any references of the same gender or same type as the concept.
Whenever a new paragraph is generated as a result of backtracking or switching
concerns, *REFERENCES* is cleared.
Persons contained in *REFERENCES* are generated as pronouns. (The concept Me, which corresponds to the daydreamer, is always generated as a pronoun.) Pronouns are generated as follows, depending on the concept and the
specified case (which defaults to the objective case if not otherwise specified by,
for example, the subject generation algorithm):
concept

| nominative | possessive |. reflexive | objective

hacegaarr ee enal|MG ae ul:
myself [me |
[she | her__| herself_| her
MALE-PERSON
himself _[him |
FEMALE-PERSON

Otherwise,

a PERSON

is generated as follows:

first-name(con) [last-name(con)] [’s]
The 's is employed if +POSS is specified. If there is no first-name(con) or
last-name(con), someone or someone's (if +POSS) is generated. An exemplar,
corresponding to a variable, is generated as this person

### B.2.9 Other Concepts
A LIST whose rest(con) is a LIST is generated as:
first(con) and rest(con)
Otherwise, a LIST is generated as:

first(con) rest(con)
Lisp lists containing Me are generated as:

element1 element2 ...elementn and Me

Otherwise, lists are generated as:
element1 element2 ...elementn-1 and elementn
A NOT is generated as:

obj(con)+NEG?=negate(NEG?)

<!-- page: 381 -->
## B.3 GLOBAL GENERATION ALTERATIONS

A HYPOTHESIZE

361

is generated as:

head(bp) imagine state(con)+GER
A LEADTO

is generated as:

ante(con)+POSS-SUBJ+GER lead to conseq(con)+GER
An ACTIVE-P-GOAL

is generated as:

Our relationship be in trouble
A PRESERVATION

is generated as:

head(bp) continue obj(con)+INF

## B.3 Global Generation

Alterations

Various global modifications to a sentence are performed by a collection of
strategies:
The generator produces a particle (such as up and on) after a pronoun and
before a non-pronoun. For example:
Karen took him on.
but

Karen took on Thomas.

The generator capitalizes the first word of the sentence. Normally, sentences
are ended with a period. If a concept is a SURPRISE emotion, the sentence is
ended with an exclamation point.
A new paragraph is begun (in English-only output traces) whenever backtracking or a shift to a new concern occurs.
Concepts asserted into a context marked as an alternative past context are
generated by default in the CONDITIONAL-PRESENT-PERFECT tense. For
example:
| would have told him | would like to know the time.

If the strength of a concept is less than .3 (and it is not a SURPRISE, NEGSURPRISE, or OVERALL-EMOTION), it is generated as:
possibly con
If a concept resulted from subgoal relaxation, it is generated as:

maybe con
in performance mode, and

<!-- page: 382 -->
say con
in daydreaming mode. Concepts resulting from subgoal relaxation are generated
in the PAST-SUBJ tense if asserted into a context marked as an alternative past
context. For example:
Say he thought | was cute.
When initial hypothetical concepts are asserted, they are generated as:

what if con+PAST-SUBJ+QUEST
For example:

What if | were going out with him?
What if there were an earthquake in Los Angeles?

## B.4 Generation Pruning
Much of the work in producing natural-sounding English narration of daydreaming is deciding when concepts should not be generated. Rules have optional infno-gen and plan-no-gen slots. These slots enable the programmer to add pruning
heuristics directly to inference and planning rules. (Hand-coded episode definitions may also specify a plan-no-gen list to be associated with induced rules.)
Facts inferred by an inference rule are only generated if the inf-no-gen of the
rule is NIL. The value of a plan-no-gen slot is a list of flags, one for each subgoal.
The meaning of the flags is as follows:

"OUTCOME
Whenever a goal is activated, its gen-advice slot is set to the value of the associated flag for future use. The generation of activated goals and goal outcomes
is then determined according to the following strategies:
e An activated goal is only generated if its objective is not already satisfied
in the context and its associated gen-advice flag is either NIL or ’ACTIVATE.

e A goal outcome is only generated if it is not a daydreaming goal and its
gen-advice is either NIL or ’ OUTCOME.

e A goal success is not generated if the objective of the goal had already
been satisfied in the context when the goal was activated.

<!-- page: 383 -->
e An activated top-level goal is only generated if it is not a daydreaming
goal.

However, input states (such as Harrison Ford is at the Nuart) are always generated.

## B.5 Additional Generation

Concepts are generated in various situations other than when a concept is asserted into a context. These section describes these situations.
When a negated fact is bolstered in the minimization strategy for rationalization, the negated fact and its justification are generated as:

anyway con+PAST because causes
where causes is determined by finding the source leaves of the inference chain.
For example:
Anyway, | was well dressed because | was wearing a necklace.

When an attitude is inverted in the minimization strategy for rationalization,
the new attitude is generated as:

anyway con
Anyway, | don’t think much of him.
After minimization has altered the strengths of emotions, these emotions are
generated.
Whenever retrieval of an episode (reminding) occurs, it is generated as:

[I remember the time] goal+PAST by subgoall +GER subgoal2+GER
...and by subgoaln+GER
where goal is the goal of the episode, and subgoali through subgoaln are the
subgoals of that goal. Each subgoal is then recursively generated according to
the same formula, until leaves are reached. The phrase | remember the time is
only generated for the top goal of the episode. Subgoals are not generated if
indicated by the associated rule.
